Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Eric Sprenkel. He's a
professor of clinical psychology at Minnesota State University in
Mankato, and today we're talking about his book DIY
The Wonderfully Weird History and Science of Masturbation. So
Dr. Sprenkel, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone. Yeah,
my pleasure as well. Thanks for having me.
OK, so, I, I mean this is a very
particular kind of topic, masturbation, but why did you
feel the need to write a book about it,
and what is basically the premise of your book?
Sure, yeah, I, I wasn't expecting to write this
book. It wasn't like a part of my five
year academic plan or anything like that. It just
kind of I fell into my lap through social
media. I was posting some things about masturbation, some
things I thought were pretty noncontroversial to talk about,
and I started receiving a lot of comments from
random people about how I was being unprofessional and
unethical because I wasn't warning my followers and fans
about all the dangers about masturbation, things like depression
and social anxiety and losing testosterone and muscle mass
and all these things that I wasn't too familiar
with of hearing, especially the psychological parts of like
depression and social anxiety, and so I, I did
a quick kind of look around of like, where
is this coming from, uh, what's fueling these beliefs,
and that I just went down a lot of
rabbit holes and I started, you know, jotting some
things down and it turned into a book outline
and I went from there.
Awesome. So, I mean, of course you cover the
history and science of masturbation in your book as
you, as the subtitle mentioned. So, uh, let's go
through some of the history and then the science
later on. So, uh, and let's start perhaps not
so much with the human history of masturbation, but.
What perhaps we could call the biological history or
the deep history of masturbation. So, uh, is masturbation
common in the animal kingdom?
Yeah, I don't know how to quantify common given
the number of organisms on this planet. Um, BUT
it's certainly not a rare occurrence, especially among a
lot of mammals. Um, AND there, there's like myths
about, oh, only captive animals masturbate as kind of
an anti-masturbation. Message of like, oh, it's not natural,
if you're confined, then you do it, but out
in the wild where you're supposed to be, you
don't see it. And and that's not true at
all. There's plenty of instances, observed instances of of
wild animals masturbating. And one, just for an example,
um, Just from a few years ago, this was
actually after I, I finished the draft of my
book, so it's not included in it, but there
was a walrus that went ashore along a beach
in this town on the eastern coast of England
on New Year's Eve, I believe it was 2023,
maybe 2022, 1 of those. And it just started
masturbating along along the beach, and it was such
a spectacle in the town that the town had
planned fireworks celebration that night for for New Year's,
and they decided to respect the masturbating walrus, and
they canceled the fireworks show and not to disrupt
them. And eventually, and this was a walrus that
was being tracked to, his name was Thor, and
eventually he just went back into the North Sea
on his journey. So yeah, there's plenty of instances
of of animals masturbating. We're not unique in that.
We are unique in the sense of like, we
are tend to be a little bit more orgasm
focused, and it's our ability to fantasize to help
with that, but in terms of touching genitals for
pleasure, it, it exists in a lot of species.
But do we know why, uh, the species of
animals that masturbate, why they do that? I mean,
does it serve any particular evolved functions?
Depending on the species, so if we look at
one of our closest, the closest relative that we
have, bonobo, the, the pygmy chimpanzee. Um, THEY do,
they, they express themselves sexually in a lot of
ways to reduce tension, to resolve conflicts, just to
kind of chill out, and a lot of like
motivations for humans, uh, as well, uh, to, to
masturbate. But otherwise, it's just an artifact of having
a sex drive and not necessarily an available partner
in your immediate surroundings, and to, to, to engage
in a solo sexuality in order to satisfy at
least some aspect of that drive.
And when it comes to human societies, what do
we know about masturbation and the kind of uh
norms, perhaps social norms about masturbation, the kind of
uh Beliefs people have about masturbation in more traditional
societies and and traditional societies like hunter gatherers, for
example, if we know anything about that and in
early civilization.
Yeah, we don't know anything specifically about masturbation with
like hunter-gatherer societies, we can only can can assume
of what it looked like, but in terms of
recorded history, and even the ancient civilizations, Greeks, Romans,
things like that. Um, THERE is evidence that masturbation
existed within those civilizations, but it wasn't really paid
much mind to. Uh, IT certainly existed void of
any kind of, uh, sinful, uh, prohibition, void of
any kind of scare tactics about health effects that
we see now or over at least the past
couple of 100 years of warning that, oh, if
you masturbate, X, Y, or Z is going to
happen to your body or your mind. It was
non-existent in that way. So it was really just
kind of an inconsequential behavior at the time. Uh,
AT most, it was the butt of jokes, and
so it was kind of viewed as like this
secondary or second tier rather behavior to partnered sex,
which was uh what what should be ideal, and
that if you didn't have a partner, then I
guess you could masturbate. So there are some jokes
about being lonely and masturbating and things like that,
but it certainly wasn't used as a scare tactic
or anti-masturbation messaging. To try to persuade people against
it,
but it was not stigmatized or pathologized,
or was it? No, not in those two, civilizations
that I mentioned. Now, you do have, you know,
an ancient one as well within Judaism, um, and
I, I get more into that with the religious
aspect of things because it was more of a
religious prohibition, uh, on it, and that, that's, that
has existed for a few 1000 years. Um, AND
so that took on a little bit of a
different take on it, and that certainly has influenced,
uh, Christianity's prohibition against it, and so on and
so forth, but within kind of classical Greek Roman
times, there, there wasn't much of a, that much
of a taboo of it other than just kind
of it being viewed again as like the second
tier behavior.
And when was it in history or perhaps particularly
in Western history because I would imagine that's the
one you would focus the most on that uh
masturbation started being problematized in any way, like for
example being considered a sin or a disease.
Yeah, so the idea of like a religious prohibition
goes back to the story of Onan in the
Book of Genesis. Now that wasn't an anti-masturbation like
fable in and of itself. It was more of
a fable about obedience and so obeying God's commands
and family responsibilities and things like that. But it
turned into this message of don't waste your seed,
because the story of Onan dealt with Onan's quote
unquote spilling his seed upon the ground as opposed
to Um, having an ejaculation within his, this is
a long story with Onan, but if you're, you're
unfamiliar, his brother died, and God commanded that he
continue his brother's family line by marrying and having
sex with his dead brother's wife. So this was
Have been his sister-in-law, and he didn't like the
idea of that, didn't mind the sex part, but
didn't like the idea of the reproduction part. And
so while they were having sex at the moment
of orgasm, he withdrew his penis and spilled his
seed upon the ground, and then God killed him
for that transgression. And so that again, that often
has been viewed as, oh, this is an anti-masturbation
story, um, but it is actually just like obey
God kind of story. But rabbis later in the
religious text, the Talmud, really took time to interpret,
well, what does this mean to not spill your
seed, what more can we kind of learn from
the story of Onan, and they really took the
not spilling the seed thing very, very literally, of
like, you need to save your seed, it has
one purpose only, and that's for the purpose of
procreation. Anything less is disobeying God's mandate of what
we should be doing with our genitals. And so
they created all these different types of rules as
a way to avoid spilling seed, and that that
backed up the, the progression of, well, what leads
to ejaculation? It's like, well, arousal does genital stimulation,
and so they started putting a lot of prohibitions
on these earlier behaviors, you know, as a way
to avoid giving accidental seed spilling, so to speak.
Um, AND then in Christianity, it wasn't really explicitly
mentioned, um, until about the 11th century, mid 11th
century with the Pope at that time, who was,
uh, was the first one to explicitly say that
masturbation is a gravely disordered act in a sin,
essentially, um, and that position has been reaffirmed by
numerous popes over the past 1000 years, up until
including Pope Benedict, um, about 10 years ago.
How about it being considered some sort of pathology
or disease? Has it ever been considered such in
medicine or by the medical system, or even by,
for example, psychiatrists or clinical psychologists? Yeah,
we started seeing the introduction that masturbation is now
physically harmful to you, not just spiritually harmful, but
physically. Around the early 1700s in England. And what's
largely pointed to is this anonymous pamphlet called Onania,
which again references that story from the Bible, Onan.
Um, AND in it, there was still a lot
of like preachy, like spiritual warnings about masturbation, you're
going to go to hell, it's a slippery slope
to other sins, you start touching yourself today, you're
going to be thieving and murdering the next time
you know it. Um, BUT this was the first
instance of, oh, masturbation is also going to cause
depression and change your skin and just prematurely age
you, and so all these physical effects now started
taking shape, and that had an influence on physicians.
Around that time, both in Europe and into the
United States, and you saw writings later in the
1700s and then definitely into the 1800s, where otherwise
well respected physicians and even physicians who were pretty
ahead of their time in a lot of other
areas and were pretty progressive. And they're still revered
that way today. They had these very backwards view
on sexuality in general, but in particular masturbation, and
so they have a lot of writings too, through,
especially throughout the 1800s of how masturbation is very,
very detrimental to your health.
In your book you go through the history of
crusaders or what you call crusaders against masturbation. Who
are these anti-masturbation crusaders? Of course I would imagine
that some of them would include the, the ones
you've already made reference. TO there when talking about
religious people, for example, and I would imagine some
of the claims made by them would track onto
also those sort of religious medical claims, but who
are they? Who are they?
Yeah, broadly speaking, they're an interesting group and sometimes
they're strange bedfellows because they don't really share much
in common ideologically other than this one area. Um,
SO, like you said, definitely the religious moralists who
say like this is a sin, this is bad,
and sometimes they can get into like some pseudo-scientific
health, uh, claims as well with that, but they're
primarily grounded in this belief that masturbation is a
sin, uh, that's spiritually harmful to you. And then
there's a lot of quack doctors, again, going back
a couple of 100 years, but still today, and
I, I, and that was kind of like the
surprising thing with the book that I thought the
history piece was going to be separate from talking
about the science today. But pretty much the anti-masturbation
claims being made today are really just mirrors of
what was being said 200 years ago, even by
physicians back then, as well as some physicians today.
Fortunately, fewer physicians today, but they, they, they're still
out there. Um, SO there are some like, uh,
you know, quack physicians, and then there are just
like what I consider like the wellness influencers on,
on social media, uh, those who claim that, oh,
if you follow these five steps, you're on your
way to like physical wellness. And unfortunately, a lot
of those, um, a lot of that advice does
get into one's sexuality and, and ideas of purity
and being pure, and this idea that, uh, especially
for men that ejaculating is reducing your testosterone and
making it more difficult to gain muscle mass, and
you're essentially physically feminizing yourself through ejaculation. And so
then you, then you have those wellness influencers. And
then kind of indirectly, you have um some branches
of feminism, not all, but some branches primarily like
what's called radical feminism. Um, THAT I say indirectly
because their target is more with pornography and the
sex industry, but pornography is for masturbation, and so
the issues overlap with that. Um, AND then a
surprising one too are like white nationalists and white
supremacists and others who engage in some types of
conspiratorial thinking and their belief that porn in particular
and masturbating to porn is a way to kind
of degrade and erode white men. Um, AND for
minorities to take over. So some conspiratorial thinking too.
Yeah, later we're going to go back to some
of what you said there. We're going to talk
about the no fat people or no fat movement
and people who make claims about semen retention and
also the overlap between anti-masturbation and anti-pornography. We're going
to talk about that, but tell us. About the
figure because he was a very prominent figure of
John Kellogg. I mean, what did he represent in
terms of anti-masturbation?
Yeah, so John Kellogg was a physician at the
late 1800s, early 1900s. He was part of a
psychiatric hospital. It's called a sanitarium at that time.
In Michigan in the United States, and he was
part of like this kind of wellness and hygiene,
purity kind of movement within the health industry at
that time. So, he was a big proponent of
kind of experimental methods of treating mental illnesses through
like hydrotherapy, different types of like interactions with water.
Sometimes it can be very like sadistic methods, um,
but he also had a lot of beliefs about
how diet influences behavior, and he was very, very
caught up with his religious beliefs and in having
his religious beliefs inform a lot of his medical
opinions, particularly around sex and particularly around masturbation. He
viewed masturbation as like the mulloch of the species,
and that it was doubly abominable, doubly because it
was not only a sin in itself, but it's
also a sin against your own body. And so
he, uh, going with the the food piece, he
thought introducing a bland diet was the best way
to kind of suppress sexual desire, particularly masturbatory desire,
and so he actually invented a very bland toasted
cornflake, um, to, to in hopes to to achieve
this goal. And if you haven't put the name
and the flake together, this is where kind of
the essentially the origin story of Kellogg's cornflakes. It
was actually his brother, Will Kellogg, that took the
company more commercial. Um, John Kellogg wanted just to
keep the cereal as a treatment, uh, intervention within
his hospital. Um, BUT nonetheless, that, that was the,
the initial invention of toasted cornflakes. Fortunately, they have
no impact on sexual desire, so feel free to
eat those as you please.
And tell us about the practices of circumcising the
foreskin of the penis without anesthesia and dousing the
clitoris with carbolic acid. I mean, what were the
purposes of that?
Yeah, so this was just kind of made in
passing in one of John Kellogg's books, um. So
I don't know how widely it was practiced. I
didn't look into that, and so I just kind
of make a brief reference to it because it
was just a brief reference in his book and
I was focused more on him as a character.
And essentially his reasoning behind including that and advocating
for it, again, whether he actually practices or not,
um, was to have the child associate something very
negative with their genitals early on as a way
to avoid coming in contact with their own genitals
through masturbation. So it was just a a a
a mechanism of essentially uh torturing a child, so
they would be afraid to touch their genitals because
now they associate their genitals with pain.
Does, uh uh do uh modern or contemporary practices
of female genital mutilation have also anything to do
with anti-masturbation or not?
I would say less anti-masturbation, more just like control
over sexuality more in general.
Hm,
OK, and it does, and that is being influenced
by different cultural beliefs and practices and what was
coming out of John Kellogg, but certainly the end
game or the end goal is the same. It's
like, let's reduce sexual drive, let's reduce sexual desire,
because these genitals should only be used for one
very specific purpose. Um, SO that in the, in
the sense, it's, it's, it's, there's significant overlap, but
the cultural reasoning is, is pretty significantly different.
Something I learned by reading your book, which before
that I wasn't aware of at all, is that
there's masturbation in masturbation in utero, right? Yeah, I
mean, how, how does that happen?
Yeah, so I had heard that, I don't know
where, some, someplace along my studies I had at
least heard it, I don't think I've ever read
it, uh, so it must have just been during
a lecture or something. And I was like, oh,
let's see, cause I started my, my book off,
uh, a little bit with a developmental perspective first
of like childhood masturbation, and I was like, well,
let's even back up further, because I remember hearing
this thing at one point in my studies. And
looking into it, and there's actually quite a bit
of research that has gone into uh observing fetuses
in utero masturbating. So through uh ultrasound technology. There,
the, the first studies came out of the 80s.
And um yeah, they, they see a uh uh
a fetus um through ultrasound, and they're grasping their
penis and making hand movements. Some of, since they
have the flexibility and the weightlessness of the amniotic
sac, essentially, they, uh, they've been observed uh sucking
on their own penis. Um, FEMALE fetuses too have
been observed masturbating through this technology as well. So
it is well documented. And the mechanism behind it,
it's, it can freak people out and be like,
Whoa, what's going on? We don't normally think of
fetuses as being like very sexually active, let alone
masturbating during the mother's pregnancy. But you know, it's,
it's at that stage of development, they, they don't
have any sex drive, right? They don't have any
kind of endocrine development that would motivate them to
seek out sexual stimulation because like they're horny, they
don't have that ability. They don't have any cognitive
functioning where they're fantasizing about the other like sexy
fetuses in the Lamaze class or anything like that.
They don't have that capacity, right? So what's actually
going on is this is just a basic stimulus
response. They're moving around, they're squirming in utero, and
they happen just through happenstance to come across their,
their genitals. In some capacity, and it was reinforcing
cause it felt good. It was soothing, right? It's
no different than observing in utero thumb sucking or
other types of body rocking. All it's doing is
serving to, to soothe the, the individual. Pretty similar
to at least one motivation that even adults have
with most masturbation is it's, can be self-sooothing. And
so, we obviously as adults have a lot of
motivations, different motivations to masturbate. Fetuses, you really just
kind of have that one, and so that's what's
getting documented and observed.
And in regards to childhood masturbation, how does it
develop and is there any problem at all with
it?
Yeah, it's developed pretty similarly as it is in
utero. It's just through happenstance, uh, you know, they're
exploring their bodies, they're exploring their world. Their world
only exists within like a couple of feet of
them, that's their entire universe. And so, of course,
they're going to be exploring through their sensory system
of, you know, trying to make sense out of
their surroundings, and that includes exploring their own body.
And so, oftentimes they do not have the dexterity
to, to even manually manipulate their, their genitals. So
a lot of times they come across genital stimulation
through uh crossing their legs or rubbing up against
something like in their crib or wherever they may
be lying down. And just like anything else, like
I mentioned before, it's stimulus response. They do something
by accident, it feels good, it's reinforcing, they do
it again. And so it starts serving that function
of a, this is just something to feel good.
Uh, TO do, and it can be soothing, uh,
as well. Again, no different than like thumb sucking
or body rocking, very common child, uh, you know,
infant and toddler types of behaviors. Occasionally, it can
be caused by some type of genital infection, like
a urinary tract infection in which the soothing is
actually more to soothe the pain. And so, there
is more of a concerted effort to touch the
genitals because they hurt. And then, even after the
infection, uh, goes away, And there's no longer pain,
the, the behavior stays around because they learn that
this is a uh a soothing behavior. This can
feel good, this can alleviate pain. There's no more
pain there, so they're just left with, oh, this
just feels good. Um, FOR the most part, this,
this isn't a problem at all. It can be
shocking to parents, it can be embarrassing for families,
especially once the child is old enough to like
walk around, and now they're doing this, you know,
in the living room during a dinner party in
front of grandma and grandpa or something. Um, AND
so those are instances in which parents can just
redirect the behavior of like, you know, there's nothing
wrong with that. Let's just not do it in
front of grandma. How about we do this by
yourself, you know, in your own room or in
the bathroom. So that's an opportunity for parents to
like just redirect the behavior as opposed to scolding
the behavior. But oftentimes parents are quick to kind
of have this knee jerk reaction cause they're like
shocked and taken aback. And so they, they can
scold, be like, no, don't do that without the
context of like, no, the behavior was fine, just
like where you were doing it was, was not
that fine. So, and typically those types of redirections
are very effective, right? It may take a couple
of trials uh for, for that message to kind
of sink in of like where this is appropriate
to do, where this isn't. If that message isn't
sinking in, that could be cause for concern that
there's something else going on, why the, the child
isn't able to develop uh social norms, rules, follow
norms, things like that. So that's not like a
masturbation problem, that's more of like a developmental kind
of problem that should be looked at as to
why they aren't learning the differences between appropriate places
and inappropriate places.
And how do children learn to be shameful about
masturbation and sex more generally? Yeah,
so that's an interesting thing about sex in general,
and masturbation in particular, is that it's not an
inherently shameful practice. We have to be taught that
it's shameful, um, and so it can be very
easily induced with a lot of shame. By that
type of reaction I was mentioning earlier of like,
you know, the child gets caught by a parent,
and instead of like redirecting the behavior, talking about
privacy in appropriate places and things like that, it's
just met with like, no, don't do that, that's
bad, that's wrong, that's sinful, that's bad for you,
whatever the case may be, without any further explanation.
And yeah, that's going to start, you know, that,
that's a form of punishment, you know, that's a
verbal punishment. In terms of if we're thinking behaviorism,
you know, we have reinforcement, we have punishment, that's
going to be a form of punishment, whereas trying
to decrease the frequency of that behavior. And so,
That drive may still be there for the child
to masturbate in some capacity. It feels good, it's
soothing, whatever, passes the time they're bored, um, but
now they're left with, oh, but mom and dad
yelled at me last time they saw me do
this, and so maybe I shouldn't do this, or
they do it and then they feel guilty and
ashamed that they're doing it, right? And so it
can be instilled very, very early on in their
development. Other times, more subtle ways shame can get
introduced is just by not talking about it at
all. We live in a culture enough, and I
think, you know, whether that's Europe or the United
States, we live in a lot of cultures in
which sex and particularly masturbation just has this cloud
of taboo over it for a variety of reasons.
And even if we don't hear that specifically, especially
from a primary caregiver, we start picking that up
through media, picking it up through friends or peer
group. That this is something that maybe is a
little embarrassing, a little taboo, we shouldn't talk about.
No one seems to be talking about it. And
the lack of talking is actually a message in
and of itself. It is reinforcing the taboo. We're
talking about everything else that's going on in our
lives, everything else that's going on with our bodies,
but this one particular behavior seems to be getting
ignored. And so the child starts connecting the dots.
It's like, well, why is that? That must mean
this is something bad, this is something, you know,
shameful, and that can start instilling some feelings of
shame around it as well.
So earlier you told us about some of the
negative attitudes that people from some of the most
popular religions in the world, particularly Catholicism, Judaism, have
about masturbation. Does, does Satanism have anything to do
with it? The
Satanism? Yeah, and so this was one area of
the book that my publisher was like, what are
you doing here? This seems a little out of
left field. Um, I didn't think it was out
of left field because I, I, I tied in
a lot of like those religions, especially with Christianity,
how they view oftentimes. Masturbation is the work of
the devil, you're being tempted by Satan, there's a
lot of these beliefs of like you're going to
hell, and so I wanted to actually incorporate Satan
in the form of the new religious movement, uh,
Satanism, you're like, oh, OK, like, well, what do
they think? About masturbation. And it is the opposite
of that, uh, pretty much that masturbation is just
part of bodily autonomy. And if it feels good,
you want to do it, do it. If you
have no interest in it, then, then don't do
it. It's pretty much like, do what thou wilt,
right? Um, IT'S your own body, who cares? Um,
YOU know, you shouldn't have these arbitrary rules placed
on you when it doesn't have any impact on
anybody else but you.
Mhm. So let's talk then about the no fat
movement, semen retention, and influences around it. So what
kinds of claims do they make about masturbation and
what are the physical be and what they, what
do they say about what are the supposed physical
benefits of masturbation abstinence?
Yeah, so. Kind of got into this a little
bit earlier with the, uh, the origin of the
book. So, cause that that was coming from semen
retentionist. So semen retentionist is anybody who thinks that
it's important for your physical health, your mental well-being
to retain your semen by not ejaculating. No fat
people, um, fapping, the, uh, the slang term for
masturbation, Fapping, so just no fat, so abstaining from
masturbation. There's the capital N and F in that
of NFA. That's more the established group that started
off on, I believe, Reddit, and they definitely have
a presence all over different social media platforms, but
no fp lowercase has just kind of turned into
shorthand for not wanting to masturbate for some type
of ideological or health reason. Um, SO they're definitely
anti-masturbation, and they think masturbation is harmful to your
body and therefore, uh, by extension, that abstaining from
masturbation is healthy for your body and, and can
promote wellness. And so, they think that masturbation causes
depression, social anxiety, uh, loss of testosterone, and therefore
a loss of, uh, muscle mass. They think it
decreases motivation. And so, you're less likely to uh
get a girlfriend, uh, get married, have children. Uh,
THEY definitely believe that it causes brain damage primarily
by watching pornography. Um, THEY think it leads to
sexual dysfunction, primarily in the form of erectile, uh,
difficulties, so ED. So, all these different things. And
then the reverse is true. That if you abstain,
you're gonna have high levels of testosterone, muscle gain.
You're gonna have the confidence and motivation to seek
out job opportunities, relationships, dating, children, all these things.
You're gonna have the best sexual functioning, so all
these things. The problem is, none of that's real.
Um, IT, it, it's all misinformation. And a lot
of it is just complete nonsense. I don't even
know where it originated from. Other times, it's a
misinterpretation of some studies that they think are claiming
to support that masturbation is harmful in this way.
But it's an inaccurate reading of the research. So
this is what you have to keep in mind,
like these research studies that sometimes are are freely
available online, which I think is ultimately a good
thing, but you have to be a trained scientist
to to understand, like a lot of it and
be able to make sense out of like, what
are these claims, what was the methodology, how does
this one article fit into the body of literature
within this whole topic, right? The average layperson does,
does not have those skills, right? Cause it is
a skill set that uh scientists had to to
train for. And so they read these studies, they
think, oh, this study shows that testosterone dropped over
a period of abstinence, that must mean masturbation is,
is bad for your testosterone and abstaining from masturbation
and definitely is going to boost your testosterone. And
there are a couple of studies that looked at
testosterone and abstinence, but it's not claiming actually what
uh the semen retentionists think. So, a lot of
it's just scientific illiteracy and not being able to
accurately interpret data.
So you said then that all the, at least
their most common claims regarding er increasing anxiety, depression,
lower motivation. Um, I mean, lower levels of testosterone
and all of that, that they are wrong. So
what do we know scientifically about masturbation? I mean,
what can you tell us scientifically about it? What
are the health benefits and are there any negatives
at all for health, for, uh, psychological health or
anything like that?
For the most part, masturbation is just a brief
moment of pleasure, and it's largely inconsequential, right? It's
not gonna be necessary for optimal health, and it's,
it's not gonna be a detriment to your health
either, right? So I think We have to be
cautious. People in my field, in the sexual health
field within psychology. Uh, NOT to oversell masturbation. I
kind of get into this at the end of
my book when I was starting to see a
lot of other sex therapists, sex researchers, sex educators
start making some Lofty claims about the benefits, the
health benefits of masturbation and be like. Uh, I
think that's a little bit of a stretch to
generalize, right? Results may vary, and that's the, the
important thing. There are mechanisms with orgasm, not unique
to masturbation, but orgasm in general. The biochemical processes,
the neurobiochemical processes involved with having an orgasm, yeah,
that could be related to lower levels of stress,
uh, improved sleep, uh, temporary decreases in experiencing pain.
It can even decrease nasal congestion, right? There's all
these factors that go on in our body during
an orgasm and afterwards that would explain why somebody
may have those outcomes and effects and feel as
if, you know, their, their nasal congestion was uh
reduced after an orgasm, or they're, they always sleep
better when they, they masturbate right before bed, right?
So there is a, there are explanations as to
why that would be scientific explanations, and for those
people that would be viewed as obviously as like
a benefit. But results may vary. Not everybody feels
that way after masturbating. Um, IT can just certainly
be, like I mentioned, for most people, just kind
of like this inconsequential behavior, other than the consequence
being pleasure. And that's the number one motivator, uh,
to, to masturbate. There have been some studies that
look at what are all your motivations to, to
masturbate. And there were things that I just mentioned,
more health-related things like improved sleep, decrease stress, unwind,
relax, reduce pain, especially from menstrual cramps, things like
that. But the number one reason by far was
I masturbate because it feels good. And that's, that's
all it needs to be. Now, the upside of,
of that, um, are there any health, uh, effects
negatively? And it could be. Um, OTHER than like
extreme cases, right? I, I don't want, I don't
want to keep this grounded in reality where like,
you know, hypothetically, someone's masturbating, uh, 300 times a
day with sandpaper. It's like, yeah, that's, that's probably
gonna have a negative impact on, on your genitals,
right? Um, BUT let's, let's keep this more in
kind of reality. Um, THE more likely negative effects
are going to be psychological. And these are going
to be a self-fulfilling prophecy, largely, and it's known
as moral incongruence. This is what happens when you
have this belief of something is bad, it's wrong,
it's immoral. It's a sin. I shouldn't be doing
this, but you do it anyways. That creates this
incongruence between your values and your behavior. And this
incongruence has been associated with a lot of different
types of psychological distress, which it makes sense, right?
You're doing something that you told yourself you should
not be doing. And so you can feel shame,
you can feel guilt, embarrassment, things like that. And
so, that's not going to be healthy for an
individual to feel bad about their own behaviors.
Yeah, uh, does moral incongruence link to people identifying
as masturbation addicts?
Yeah, 100%. It's one, sometimes the, depending on the
study, one of the top predictors of those who
self-label as a masturbation addict or a porn addict,
um, what's driving that is not so much the
frequency in which they are masturbating. Um, SO it's
not like everybody who claims to be a masturbation
addict is masturbating 1015 times a day. Oftentimes they're
just masturbating once a day, a couple of times
a week, something that's very normal for somebody else
that they don't view it as a problem at
all. It's not impacting their life. But for somebody
with moral incongruence, when they've told themselves, I should
not be doing this at all, just doing it
once can create this incongruence and this distress. And
then if you're doing something you told yourself I
shouldn't be doing, how do you make sense out
of that? Well, I'm out of control. I must
be addicted to it, cause why else would I
be doing this if I wasn't addicted? I want
to stop. I want to cut back, but I
can't. Uh, SO again, less about frequency, it could
just be once a week that they're doing it,
that they're trying to stop. And uh they're more
likely to label themselves as a masturbation addict as
a result.
And this moral incongruence, I mean, the sources of
it might be religious beliefs against masturbation and some
of these other beliefs put forth by, for example,
the no fat people and the anti-masturbation crusaders.
Yeah, 100%. It's largely fueled by religious beliefs about
masturbation. Um, BUT I mean, in a, from a
secular perspective and religious beliefs aside, you could have,
so what was very common when I used to
do clinical work before getting into academia. I can't
recall more than like 2 patients I ever saw.
And I was treating, uh, I was a psychologist
at a sexual health clinic and a large program
that we had was dealing with what was called
at the time, at least, compulsive sexual behavior. And
so a lot of those guys were, um, you
know, they were masturb what they thought were, they
were masturbating too much, watching porn and masturbating too
much, things like that. I can only think of
like 2 instances in which the patients were single
and came in, like single as in like not
having a partner, a girlfriend or a spouse. Um,
SO, all the other guys were coming in because
this was causing problems in the relationship. If they
were single, it wasn't going to be a problem.
But it was an issue in the relationship. So
you can also have this moral incongruence where it
doesn't fit the values of the relationship more so
than the individual. And so if the relationship, if
your partner is saying, I'm not comfortable with you
masturbating, I think it's a form of cheating, I
get insecure because I think like, why are you
masturbating? If we could be having sex, are you
unsatisfied? It just creates a lot of what I
think is unnecessary stress on the relationship, but this
is a reality for a lot of couples of
how they feel about one partner masturbating or looking
at porn. And so they have this rule, or
a lot of times it's even an unspoken rule
that masturbation, especially masturbating to porn, should not be
happening in this relationship. But of course the person
does it anyways, and so that creates that same
incongruence. They're doing something that they know they shouldn't
be doing, but are doing it anyways. They can
feel guilt, shame, embarrassment, and if they get caught,
which they often do, then you have a pretty
significant relationship conflict on your hands. So that's outside
of any kind of religious teaching. Uh, CAUSE that
can just maybe a relationship rule that has nothing
to do with religion. But even with the single
guys, a lot of the no fat guys are
actually not religious at all, um. And so their
belief is more about how this is impacting their
body, and so they just really buy into a
lot of health misinformation. And so they don't want
to masturbate for that reason. They're scapegoating masturbation as
a reason why they don't have bigger muscles, why
they don't have the girlfriend that they want, maybe
why they don't have the job that they want,
right? So masturbation is pointed to as this is
why cut out masturbation, you'll start seeing improvements in
all areas of your life. So they take that
on themselves. That's their new goal, like their fitness
goal almost. And if they slip, which they always
do. Um, THEN they're gonna feel really bad about
themselves and label themselves as a sex addict because
they're doing something that they had prohibited for themselves.
When it comes to incongruence that stems from relationship
values because your partner is not comfortable with you
masturbating, is there anything that people can do about
it? I mean, to deal with that in their
own relationship.
Yeah. Um, THIS can be complex because, you know,
this often relies on couples therapy to really um
understand what is the, uh, the opposition, uh, to
masturbation. What is this actually about? A lot of
times, even like masturbation itself isn't the scapegoat, but
what's bringing people into therapy is porn. That, oh,
my partner is watching porn, he's a porn addict,
um, he needs to not watch this at all.
This is causing problems in our relationship. And that's
where you start as a couples therapist of like
working through, OK, like, what does this look like?
What are your values around this? But it's pretty
clear, and this was certainly my experience doing clinical
work. That It's less about the porn and more
about the masturbation. So if you take porn out
of the equation, it's like, OK, are you comfortable
with your partner just masturbating to fantasy? And typically
no. And so the issue wasn't about whether their
eyes were open looking at a screen or closed,
playing a fantasy in their own mind. The problem
was that they had a solo sex life or
a sex life that didn't include them, right, as
their partner, right? And that brought up the same
stuff like, are you dissatisfied, um, you know, I,
I think this is a form of cheating. I'm
not comfortable with you experiencing sexual pleasure without me,
kind of all these things, right? And there's no
right or wrong there, um, of like, which partner
is right, which values do you have to adhere
to, but the couple's work then is like, is
there any kind of middle ground? Can we explore
this enough of like, what could be a reasonable
solution to this, if this person desires masturbation, but
you are adamantly opposed to it. And there may
not be a resolution, and this could be a
relationship killer for some that they, they just cannot
see eye to eye, and it's just going to
lead to secrecy and continuous violations of trust and
betrayal. But for others, there may be um like
some type of middle ground of like, where there,
it's at least out in the open, uh, because
a lot of what's damaging with this within relationships
is the secret keeping, um, that the one partner
is secretly masturbating, masturbating to porn, and then they
get caught, and it's like, oh, this is what
you were doing in here. I thought you were
doing, you know, something else. So, it's a completely
different perception of what your partner's doing, uh, if
they're doing something in secret that they're intentionally hiding
from you. So that's oftentimes the most destructive element
with this is just the secrecy and less so
about the porn and less so about the masturbation.
And so for those those couples, it's like, OK,
can we acknowledge that masturbation exists in this relationship?
And one of you or both of you do
enjoy masturbating from time to time. For the most
part, it does not influence the relationship in any
way. We can explore how masturbation meets certain needs
that partnered sex does not, just as partnered sex
meets certain needs that masturbation cannot. They're separate behaviors.
And if they can all agree on that, then
the issue isn't secret anymore, but they can still
have a sense of privacy that they can masturbate
in private, but it's no longer a secret. There's
no way of like, quote unquote getting caught.
But does that tend to be a frequent issue
in relationships where one of the partners masturbates and
the one and the other doesn't, or is it,
or do you find that most couples tend to
just deal well with it or not care about
it? I mean.
Yeah, it's a little bit of a mixed bag
and pers perspectives are skewed because a lot of
times questions are asked this to clinicians, uh, myself
included, so we're seeing where it already kind of
exploded in relationships or kind of dealing possibly just
with one type of dynamic. But oftentimes it is
either just one partner does it and the other
doesn't at all. Uh, OTHER times one partner watches
porn and masturbates, the other person just masturbates and
doesn't watch porn. OK. And then other times it
can be a frequency discrepancy of like, oh, they're
masturbating several times a week, whereas like, I'm not
against masturbation, but I only do it like once
a month. And so that's more of like a
desire discrepancy that's very common in relationships, but more
so a desire discrepancy about how often you have
partnered sex. But those desire discrepancies can also play
out with masturbation, because we can start making assumptions
about our partner based on their frequency of masturbation.
So it can come out in a couple of
different ways.
But on the topic of uh masturbation addiction, is
there really such a thing, or is it just
simply a matter of moral or relationship incongruence?
For how we think about addiction, it doesn't really
line up that well with masturbation or with porn,
right? So if we think of substance use and
substance use disorders of experiencing an intoxication from the
substance and then continuing to seek out that feeling
of intoxication. To the point that we're developing a
tolerance, and we develop that tolerance over time, and
that we need to start taking more of the
substance more frequently or in higher doses in order
to get that same feeling of intoxication. And then
if we develop that tolerance and stop, we have
some type of withdrawal syndrome. That's, that's not playing
out with masturbation. Physiologically, it does not play out
in that way. There's not tolerance, there's not withdrawal.
It may feel difficult to, you know, if you're
a daily masturbator, then to stop masturbating, but that's
not a withdrawal syndrome of your body's like used
to orgasms. Because what's, what's the half-life of an
orgasm? It's just a couple of seconds, right? Whereas
you ingest um cocaine or heroin, it has a
much longer half-life in your body where you're experiencing
the effects of it. So, in a lot of
ways, it does not operate similarly to addiction, and
so it's, I certainly do not. Categorize it in
that way. But I want to say that can
people Experience significant problems in their life, in their
relationships, uh, because of masturbation, absolutely, right, and so
that's where it kind of gets more into that
moral incongruence thing and that that can certainly be
destructive in someone's life, and that is related to
masturbation, obviously, but it's more related to their attitudes
toward masturbation and the conflict now up against their
masturbatory behavior. The other avenue in which to explore
that's clinically relevant. It's what's called emotional regulation or
dysregulation. And that's, that's shown up in the literature
too of the self-described like porn addicts or sex
addicts that if it's not related to this moral
incongruence, there can be some motivation for emotional regulation,
that they have a lot of stress that may
not be diagnosable. It's just kind of general stress,
or it could be a diagnosable condition of a
mood disorder, an anxiety disorder, you know, something that
is psychiatric. For them, that they're looking for coping
mechanisms. And there's nothing inherently wrong, obviously, with looking
for coping mechanisms, we all need them. And masturbation
can be that, and there's nothing inherently wrong with
that. People will get into problems with masturbation if
it's their only coping mechanism, right? And then especially
if you have high levels of stress, psychiatric disorders
in which you need a whole array of coping
strategies to deal with your symptoms, uh, to better
manage your symptoms, if you're only relying on masturbation,
that's where you're gonna start seeing some compulsive use
of it, some high frequency use, some use in
inappropriate places. You're stressed out at work, you masturbate
at work. Looking at, looking at porn on your
work computer, gonna get in trouble, you know, at
your job, right? That's all kind of Looked at
as, oh, you're a porn addict, you're a sex
addict because you looked at this at work, you
know, you're out of your mind. It's like, well,
digging a little bit deeper, the function of that
behavior was emotional regulation, right? To, to regulate a
dysregulated body. Um, SO we can see at that
like the masturbation and whether it's to porn or
not, it's more of a function to alleviate symptoms
of some other type of pathology.
Right. Just going back for a second to the
no fat people, and I mean, in this particular
case, uh, I heard this kind of claim not
only from them but also from some of the
other anti-masturbation crusaders because they say that it's, or
some of them claim that it's not just masturbation.
That is harmful, but even ejaculation itself, I mean,
why wouldn't, uh, if that's the case, why wouldn't
it also be harmful to ejaculate during sex? Does
this make any sense at all?
No, it doesn't make sense. There and there's only
been a couple of people throughout like this anti-masturbation
health crusade over the past couple of years. That
were ideologically consistent. Franklin Graham, he was a reverend
in New England in the early 1800s. He was
consistent thinking that any orgasm was bad for your
body, right? So, at least that made sense. Like
if you think having an orgasm and particularly ejaculating
is doing all this physical damage to your body,
and like what you, what you said, well, wouldn't
that happen with intercourse, uh, just as much as
it would during masturbation? And like, yeah, it should.
Um, AND so, Graham recognized that. Um, BUT a
lot of others do not, especially today, it's, it's
rare to see that distinction, uh, made, um. Or
lack of lack of distinction, rather. Usually what you
see today is that, no, masturbation is physically harmful
to you, ejaculation from masturbation is physically harmful to
you, but partnered sex is healthy for you, right?
You need to strive to do that because that's
what nature has intended for you. That's what God
has intended for you, whatever their argument, underlying argument
is. Physiologically, it doesn't really matter. There are some
differences in terms of how we make sense out
of situations, right? That's why, you know, we can
get certain needs met with a partner sexually that
we can't individually and vice versa. Um, SO there
are some like, you know, relational needs that get
met. There's some bonding, there's some feelings of closeness.
With partnered sex that aren't necessarily there with masturbation.
But in terms of the physical mechanism of expelling
semen from your body, that semen doesn't care if
it's going inside of a vagina or landing on
an iPad. Physiologically, No difference.
And do people also report better orgasms during sex
than during masturbation?
I've seen some studies that try to look at
that, and yeah, there has been greater satisfaction with
uh partnered sex orgasms than solo sex. Um, BUT
then you hear, you know, other studies, I haven't
seen like any empirical data on this, so they're
left with just anecdotes which are not data, but
saying that I can only climax from solo sex,
right, primarily women, right, that Um, masturbation is my
only means to orgasm, um, or if they can't
orgasm with a partner, it's kind of like, uh,
it took forever and it finally got there, and
I was like, yeah, OK, but masturbating with my
vibrator, consistent, reliable, and very, very intense orgasms, right?
But the research on guys has shown that subjectively,
obviously the subjective experience. That masturbation is kind of
second tier to partnered sex. Now, whether, and it's
impossible to kind of measure that unless they are
hooked up to physiological reading equipment that would measure
the intensity of the muscle contractions during orgasm and
is that different than with a partner? So maybe
there are physiological differences, but my guess would be
it's more of a perceptual difference, right, that having
sex with a partner, having an orgasm with a
partner has a lot more reinforcers attached to it,
a lot less taboo attached to it. So the
perception is it's a lot more enjoyable.
Are there any way, any other ways apart from
moral incongruence and relationship incongruence that people might feel
bad after masturbation?
Um Well, those are the drivers, uh, of why
they may feel bad, the mechanism of which they
may feel bad. Oftentimes is legit, and it's not
just, you know, they're making it up that, and
I, I didn't think that interacting with some of
these guys early on in the, the, the book
development when they were telling me that they feel
depressed and a motivated. A little socially anxious after
they had an orgasm for masturbation. I didn't think
they were making that up. I, I believe that
that's what they felt. And my belief with this
is that it, it operates similarly to how somatic,
a lot of somatic disorders exist. So, for those
unfamiliar, somatic disorders is a category of mental disorders
that include things like, in layman's terms, like being
a hypochondriac, right? Um, That you, whether or not
there's actually something physically there, you interpret it as
something very, very wrong with you, you know, a
headache isn't just like, oh, I have tension today,
right? A headache is an indication that you have
a brain tumor, right? Um, AND sometimes you may
not even have anything detectable, um, that a physician
could find wrong with you, but you're convinced that,
you know, something is wrong with you, right? So
whether there is an underlying factor or not, Um,
this is all kind of like a manifestation of
a somatic disorder. How this plays out with masturbation
and guilt and feeling bad afterwards is that, yeah,
the, the post-orgasm experience does have a plethora of
neurotransmitters and hormones involved that are supposed to, to
make you feel at ease, satiated, calm, right? Things
like that. And most people interpret that that's a
pleasurable experience, as it kind of, you know, took
the, the steam out of the pressure a little
bit, um, or pressure out of the steam, whatever
that analogy is, um. And it satisfied the sexual
drive, so you feel satiated, so you feel less
driven, at least in this one area. But for
those who feel masturbation should be avoided, they could
misinterpret those feelings, same feelings, but instead of feeling
satiated and relaxed, they feel unmotivated and depressed. So
that's how they're interpreting the sensation of post orgasm,
that it robbed them of all motivation. Uh, NOT
just sexual motivation, but oh, now they can't go
to the gym, uh, they can't walk up to,
to women and introduce themselves, right? They feel depressed,
even though other people say like, oh no, this
is just kind of feeling relaxed. It's like, no,
this feels like depression to me, right? And so
those kinds of things can, can happen. And it's
more, I'm not calling it a somatic disorder, but
it operates similarly as a somatic disorder.
OK. So, are there people, uh, I mean, I,
I, I'm, I guess there are, but, uh, are
there particular people, maybe feminists who start from an
anti-porn position and then end up in an anti-masturbation
position, and if so, what kinds of claims do
they tend to make?
Yeah, the, the feminist arguments against porn, that's been
going on since, you know, at least the 1970s.
They've been known as like the sex wars or
the porn wars through the 1970s and the 198980s.
It's hotly contested. Again, it's not all branches of
feminism. There's plenty of branches of feminism that embrace
pornography, workers' rights, viewing it more from a, you
know, worker's perspective, things like that. So there is
a particular ideology within feminism that views pornography as
violence against women, degradation against women, exploitation and objectification
of women. So those are ideological arguments, right? And
you can't debate that scientifically because that's like, Debating,
thinking that porn is a sin. I was like,
well, OK, if that's your belief, then that's your
belief. I can't point to studies where it says,
no, this isn't a sin, right? Um, SO the
problem is that both with like the religious arguments,
the spiritual arguments, and some of the feminist arguments
against pornography. They're largely ideological, but oftentimes they kind
of cherry pick some empirical evidence, some of the
science to support their claims. Oftentimes, like I mentioned
earlier, they're selecting articles based on a misunderstanding and
misinterpretation of what that study actually is saying. Um,
SO some scientific illiteracy is going on. But I
would say that for the most part, feminist anti-porn
arguments don't turn into anti-masturbation arguments as easily as
religious anti-porn arguments turn into anti-masturbation. And that's because
for the religious ideology, all of it is a
sin, Masturbation, porn, watching porn without masturbation, it's all
outside of the purview of what God wants for
your sexuality. For the feminist argument, it's it largely
is focused on the exploitation of women within pornography
and concerns about seeing that, what that's going to
do to men in real life and enact aggression
against women in real life.
But, but sometimes they make claims about the, uh,
the effects that watching porn might have on the
sexual health of men as well.
Yeah, they do, but that's still focused on porn,
uh, for the most part, and not necessarily masturbation.
Um, WHERE I do see occasionally a feminist anti-porn
argument go into just an anti-masturbation argument, gets into
some thought policing of like, OK, take the porn
out of the equation. Are you free to masturbate
to to whatever? It's like, no, like, what are
you thinking about, uh, right? And is that those
fantasies. Just similar to the, the pornography that they
opposed to. Does it include instances of male dominance
and female submission, right? Um, SO they, I, I've
seen it sometimes they're concerned about fantasy life during
masturbation, and that would be more of an anti-masturbation
argument. Similarly, using sex toys, uh, male sex toys,
uh, for sexual pleasure of like flashlights, pocket pussies.
Um, ESPECIALLY sex dolls, um, that that comes up
with the same arguments that this is just acting
out male dominance against women sexually.
And that it promotes the objectification of women,
right? Correct, yeah, and, and especially with like the
sex toys, there, there isn't really data to support
that those fears are, are true.
Yeah, and I also, uh, and now I want
to focus specifically on porn because I mean, there's,
uh of course you said that there's not a
big link between Anti-porn feminism and anti-masturbation feminism, but
they also make lots of claims about pornography itself
that might be wrong. I mean they also claim
that watching porn causes sexual violence. Is there any
evidence to support that?
Not overall, right? So there's been a couple of
meta-analyses that have been done on this issue, the
link between violence and pornography, and for the most
part, watching pornography is going to be very inconsequential
to a person's own behavior, particularly aggressive and violent
behavior. But this is where it gets very nuanced.
So, you know, a lot of times anti-porn arguments,
uh, label all porn bad and that it's going
to have a negative effect on all viewers. There's
no research to support that whatsoever, not even close,
right? So we can't say that porn is inherently
harmful to people and especially in this area that
causes violence or aggression, particularly against women. No research
to support that. So now we have to look
at it a little bit more nuanced of like,
well, is there certain types of pornography that could
lead to aggressive and violent behavior against women, or
is it more about the viewer and certain viewers
may be more at risk of engaging in violent
behavior after watching whatever type of pornography. So it
is more about the latter. That it's less about
the content in the pornography, even though there has
been some links early on about exposure to violent
pornography can lead to some, at least attitudinal changes,
uh, short term in the viewer of being more
accepting against uh of uh aggression toward women, more
accepting of like rape myths and things like that.
Um. But largely looking at the data, we have
to look at the individual and the individual watching
it. So it's less about the porn and more
about who's watching it. And there has been one,
a couple of studies that looked at those who
are already at high risk of having recidivism, meaning
they, they've already committed a sex crime, and they're
at high risk, and there's a lot of factors
that go into being at high risk again. For
offending for a 2nd, or 3rd, or a 4th
time, those individuals tend to be a little bit
more susceptible to the effects, especially of violent watching
violent pornography, right? So that's a very, very different
conversation of like, all porn's bad because Men who
watch it are going to be aggressive and violent
toward women versus actually those who have already been
violent toward women and who have a high propensity
to do it again. If they're watching violent porn,
that can make them a little bit more susceptible
to being engaging in violence in real life. So
it goes from very broad to very, very narrow.
So unless you're on the sex offender registry already,
more than likely you don't have to worry about
porn effects because there's so much that goes into
violence, um, that isn't. Um, I mean, part of
the equation of watching pornography passively, right? It's characteristics
that make one aggressive and violent with or without
pornography. Um, SO those are the, those are the
factors that are more of a driver, uh, for
violence against women than, uh, than pornography alone is.
You know, I always tend to be very skeptical
about these kinds of claims of porn causing sexual
violence and things like that, because I mean we
have a very long history of people making claims
about particular kinds of content causing violence, like violent
movies causing violence, violent video games causing violence, and
there's never any even correlation to find
there. Yeah, so, you know, like pornography gets scapegoated
a lot. It gets scapegoated for a lot of
social ills, relational ills, individual ills. Um AND the,
the belief and concern that it's leading to violence
is one of the oldest ones in pornography's history,
at least modern pornography of like starting in the
70s and the 80s. Uh, BUT you're right, it's
really no different than some of the moral panics
that have happened with heavy metal music, uh, with
Mortal Kombat in the 90s, right? So that was,
that was my era of Mortal Kombat and Doom
and heavy metal music, all those things that were
around me growing up and all parents that were
in political commentators were concerned of like, we're all
going to turn into like school shooters because of
this, and it's like, that's not the driving factor.
School shooters aren't bred out of a video game.
If that was the case, we would have a
lot more shootings than we actually do already. So
there has to be other factors at play that
actually have nothing to do with the media, uh,
itself.
Yeah, I, I mean, even if I remember correctly,
even after the Columbine massacre, some people blamed Marilyn
Manson and his music for the violence there.
Yeah, and the, the, the ironic part was with
that was the, those shooters didn't even listen to
Marilyn Manson. They, they listened to music that was
similar, like Rammstein, KMFDM, but not Manson, but Manson
was the easy scapegoat at that time because he
was the most visible, especially in the US. Um,
SO yeah, there will always be scapegoats, uh, for
the, for this kind of thing, and it is,
I, I think a lot right now that we
see with what has happened in the past that
we have labeled in hindsight as moral panics, right?
This kind of societal. Panic, anxious response to something
that we think is happening culturally, that's this phenomenon
that we need to like crack down on. Uh,
WE see a lot of that with pornography today
of like these very, very generalized hyperbolic claims of
porn effects, uh, that don't focus on nuance at
all and just have these sweeping generalizations that all
porn is gonna cause these effects. And like, we
know that's not true.
So we talked about masturbation addiction earlier. What about
porn addiction? Because that's also something that we some
uh a type of claim that we hear from
anti-porn feminists and other kinds of, for example, religiously
motivated people when they blame porn for this and
that kind of thing. Um, I mean, is there
such a thing, or, or is, or, or is
it, or is the problem again related to moral
incongruence?
Yeah, the, the latter. So everything that we talked
about with masturbation addiction applies to porn addiction, and
in fact, the research actually doesn't do a great
job of separating the two. They treat them as
the same because as as one researcher has pointed
out, porn is for masturbation. It's actually very rare
for people just to kind of sit around and
watch pornography. And not use it for masturbation. That's
why we call it porn use, um, instead of
just porn watching, what are we using it for?
We're using it to masturbate, right? We don't use
that for other media either. We don't say Netflix
use, we say we're watching Netflix, not using Netflix.
Uh, SO even the language that we have around
porn indicates that it implies that. It is for
masturbation, and it's, it's difficult to, to tease those
two apart. And that, that creates a problem with
the research because everything that we know about porn
addiction, is it really about porn or is it
just about masturbation? And some of the studies that
try to differentiate between the two have found that
masturbation is actually more of the ingredient that is
leading to some effects or non-effects than the porn
itself. And I certainly have seen that clinically, as
I was mentioning. Uh, BEFORE that, for couples who
are struggling with some type of one of their
porn use, we take porn out of the equation,
but they're still masturbating. Are the problems still there?
Yeah, they're still there, right? Um, SO yeah, the
mechanisms behind porn addiction are, are very, very slim,
similar to what we were talking about with masturbation
addiction.
But clinically, I mean, from a clinical psychology perspective,
medically, is there anything that can be harmful about
watching porn, consuming porn, masturbating to porn, anything like
that?
Nothing that can be said definitively of like, absolutely
you watch this kind of porn, this is what's
gonna happen to your brain, to your body, to
your behavior. There's no research to suggest that. The
best things that we have um would be like
correlational studies that show like just a relationship between
two variables, not necessarily cause effect. And this is
where that scientific literacy is so important because there
is one famous study that came out several years
ago in Germany. That uh looked at gray matter
in the brain through brain imaging, I think it
was MRI specifically, um, and how that related, the
amount of gray matter in their brain and how
that related to the participants' porn use. And what
they found is that the more porn that the
participants consumed, the lower amount of gray matter that
they had, uh, as evidence from these uh these
MRI scans. And of course, anti-porn people, anti-masturbation people
run with that headline of like, porn causes brain
damage. Porn causes decrease of gray matter in the
brain. It's like one, the study, the study's design,
the methodology, you can't conclude that it's not cause
effect. We have a relationship between two variables and
a very interesting relationship, right? Um, AND that, yeah,
as one goes up, one goes down, but it
could be the opposite direction. It may not be
the porn causing the differences, right? If we could
test this in an experimental way where we could
more infer causality. It one possible uh scenario is
that, yes, more porn causes decrease, decreases in gray
matter in the brain. Or it could be that
um decreases in gray matter in the brain lead
to people watching more pornography. Maybe it's sensation seeking,
stimulation seeking, something like that, right? But it started
with the lower gray matters, it wasn't the porn
that caused it. Or often the case with these
correlational studies, it's some 3rd variable or 4th variable,
5th variable. That's not even part of the, the
study that wasn't uh examined or assessed, that's contributing
to both the decreases in gray matter and the
increases. In, um, in pornography watching, right? And so
the two aren't actually directly related. There's no cause
effect between the two, it's something else causing both
in the individual, right? That one study, we don't
know, we cannot conclude the directionality of that relationship.
And furthermore, for just this as an example for
this one study, because the study gets cited a
lot. Anytime you see porn use causes brain damage,
and they do have a citation, more than likely
it's this study, so I like to dissect it
a lot. The other, the most important thing to
me, other than the directional problems that we can
infer. IS that the study was done on 64
men, which was a fine sample size, especially dealing
with like brain imaging, right? Those are pretty intensive
studies. But all 64 men in the study were
completely healthy. There were no functional impairments. There were
no observable cognitive impairments. There was no psychiatric disorders
present, anything like that. So, they were all healthy
men, regardless of the amount of porn that they
watched, even though they saw some differences in the
brain scans, right? Those brain scans did not lead
to any type of functional or cognitive impairment, making
the brain scans kind of I don't want to
say inconsequential, but this is why you don't do
kind of fishing expeditions with, uh, body, uh, imaging,
right, and scanning, because you may find these kind
of interesting things that are technically an anomaly, but
there's no symptoms that go along with them, so
you can't make sense as to the pathology of
it, right? And so even with the lower brain,
uh, gray matter, uh, brain volume. That has zero
impact on these guys' lives. So it's like, well,
what impact can we actually say that any of
this is having, because this is 64 healthy men.
Yeah, so what do you make then of anti-porn
crusaders, uh, because, I mean, of course, I, I
could ask you to comment on the more moral
side of things, which is something that many times
anti-porn feminists, um, come up to the uh to
the table with, I mean, with, uh, moral kinds
of arguments and then. We could get into a
conversation about the porn industry and things like that,
but of course I don't imagine that you are
an expert on that, and I'm not sure if
you're even interested in the more moral or political
side of pornography, but from the perspect the perspective
of a psychologist, what do you think of anti-porn
crusaders and their claims?
Well, from a therapeutic perspective, if, you know, a
patient comes in saying that they're anti-porn, it's not
me to judge that or change their mind, right?
They're coming from it from whatever ideological perspective, like
that's their value system, right? And they have to
uh accept patient autonomy with that. Um, SO it's
more of an issue when it comes into the
political arena of like, oh, I feel this way
about porn, so therefore no one should watch it.
It should be illegal. There should be all these
restrictions placed on it because I believe it's bad,
right? And that's when you can start pushing back,
be like, is it bad? What are you basing
that off? And will these restrictions actually reduce the
effects that you think this is having, right? Or
is this just more state involvement in media? Um,
AND is that a good thing, right, overall for
like for free speech issues, right? So there are
a lot of ideological issues that can come into
it, but also these ideological issues often rely on
scientific arguments to support their ideology, especially in the,
in the realms of public policy, and that's when
you can kind of push back. So my belief
of it, kind of looking at the big picture
is kind of what we've kind of talked about
a little bit sometimes is, is. That being anti-porn
is largely missing the point, and it's largely scapegoating
something that actually has very little to do with
or is, is a small piece of what you're
actually concerned about. So if you're concerned about violence,
right, and you put you're hyperfocused on pornography and
you want to ban pornography because you think it
leads to violence and just general violence, not violence
necessarily only to women, um, but violence among like
men. Um, THAT it's just creating violent behavior. It's
like, well, is pornography the really the best thing
to go after, right? The top priority to go
after. There's a lot of other media that have
violent content in that that we can regularly consume
openly, and we don't have to secretly consume it.
Go onto YouTube and you can watch the most
violent videos imaginable. Real life violence, not situated, not
uh simulated, uh, even aggression within maybe like a
BDSM scene in porn, but we can live stream
essentially wars going on all over the world, right?
Is that more of a concern about having an
influence on violent behavior than pornography? Personally, that's just
my opinion, I think it should be, right? Um,
AND that's why I think like, so what is
it about porn actually that gets you so upset
that you think this is the top priority to
address your issue that you're so concerned about. And
I think it really does come down to just
a discomfort with sex in general, a discomfort of
seeing that so blatantly um displayed in pornography that
it creates a lot of discomfort. I think, you
know, even if a casual person is pretty comfortable
with the idea of pornography, they may watch it
from time to time. But if pornography, you know,
was shown to them in an environment that they're
not used to seeing it, it would be very
shocking and embarrassing and maybe possibly even shameful. They
would feel guilty about it. It stirs up a
lot of emotions because of the cultural taboos that
many cultures have about sex in general and here's
sex displayed on the screen, right? And then we
start thinking about, well, this can't be healthy, right?
I'm having this reaction to it, even though I
thought I myself was a sex positive person. This
is like too much, right? There's too much sex,
um, because it's close-ups of genitals or I don't
like the position that they're in, that looks a
little too aggressive. Are they consenting to this? Let's
look at the, the workplace conditions, right? So then
it kind of gets into a workers' rights issue.
Um. But all these things can get stirred up
in the individual that they feel uncomfortable about, and
they project that onto the media, saying that the
media is harmful, and other people are going to
be more harmed by it. If I'm feeling this
way, oh my goodness, what's a 19 year old
going to feel when they see this, right? That's
going to be detrimental. So it's a lot of
assumptions based on a projection of our own discomfort
with seeing explicit depictions of people fucking.
OK, so, uh, I mean, I was going to
ask you just one last question, but something else
came to my mind that I think it's also
interesting to address here, particularly because now, and I
don't want you to comment on, uh, the technological
side of things specifically, but now in the UK
for example, there are people pushing for laws to
try to. I mean that that basically forced people
to identify themselves online to try to reduce porn
consumption or the exposure, the exposure of children to
porn, yeah, the age verification and all of that,
but I mean just from purely a psychological perspective.
Uh, I know this is, this is going to
be a very controversial question, particularly, um, even more
so for conservative people, but are there negative psychological
effects of, uh, children and adolescents watching porn or
watching people having sex or anything like that?
Yeah, so the, the way the research can be
done ethically is that we can't have experimental studies
to, to, to look at cause effect, right? There's,
there's no institutional review board at any university that
is going to green light a study where you're
taking a bunch of 14 year olds into a
room, showing them pornography, and then measuring outcomes afterwards.
That study is just not going to be approved.
Uh, SO at best, you have to rely on
correlational research, which can provide some, some information on
things, but again, we're just showing relationships between two
things, not necessarily a causal relationship, just two things
vary with one another. So, with that, um, some
of the research that I've seen is, um, You
know, they're, they're, from my perspective, and why I've
largely avoided correlational research in my own career, because
I don't like the problem of those third variables,
those unexplained third variables that could explain relationships, uh,
causal relationships, um, especially within media studies. Because when
you look at if there's any type of relationship
that's established between early exposure to pornography and some
type of negative outcome, health outcome, behavioral outcome, things
like that. Like, well, what else is going on,
right? And a big one that often gets overlooked,
it has been studied and controlled for in some
instances and has been pointed to as a key
factor is, uh, parental supervision, right? And so, those
with less parental supervision oftentimes have greater access to
a whole host of different types of media. And
media that's designed and made for adults and that
they're going to be watching, um, anyways, and certain
negative health outcomes or behavioral outcomes. It's like, well,
is it the media that's contributing to those outcomes
or more so the lack of supervision that could
be independently related to those outcomes as well, right?
Uh, SO there's, for me, the research is too
muddy to make big conclusions, especially definitive conclusions of
like, Yeah, if you're 15 years old and you
come across a pornography link, and you click on
that link, this is what to expect, uh, to
your health, to your behavior, to your psychological well-being.
There's no research that can answer that definitively.
OK, so I have one last question then, uh,
because this is something that you, uh, talk about
at the very end of your book. Who are
the sex educators and the moderates fighting back against
the anti-masturbation crusaders? And I mean, why do you
think it's impo uh sex education is important when
it comes to how people deal with. Uh, MASTURBATION
and things like that.
Yeah, so I'd say this is definitely within our
domain, right? So any type of mental health provider,
psychologists, social workers, counselors, therapists who specialize in sexual
health, sexual behavior, sexual disorders, this is definitely within
our domain. We're the experts in this. We're the
most comfortable with this behavior. We have the less.
We're least, least likely to have a lot of
negative feelings come up when talking about sex that
could be projected in a way that's kind of
hyperbolic or overgeneralizing to, to things and engaging in
scare tactics. Doesn't say it doesn't happen even within
our own field. It's just, it's, we have more
training that's less likely to happen. Uh, SO this
is definitely within our wheelhouse to address, um, and
I think we should be addressing it because there's
a lot of misinformation. Out there. And it's like
uh trying to use, um, you know, like a,
a leaf blower against the tsunami. Uh, YOU'RE not
going to stop that wave, uh, from coming in.
Um, BUT the best we can do is try
to be consistent enough in our messaging that maybe
somebody somewhere will hear it and understand like, OK,
what messaging should I actually believe on this? The
one that's coming from those with expertise in this
or some random A person with a podcast who's
spouting nonsense and selling supplements and who promises if
you masturbate less, um, you're going to gain 500%
in your testosterone. It's like, hopefully, intuitively, that does
not make sense that that would be the case.
Obviously, they have uh ulterior motive to sell their
motivate uh sell their supplements, sell their motivation coaching
sessions, things like that. So maybe we need to
start looking for more credible sources of where we
get our information as it relates to, to masturbation.
So there's been a lot of these uh pro-masturbation.
Um, uh, CRUSADERS and proponents uh throughout history. Uh,
ONE of the biggest ones from the 70s was
uh Betty Dodson. Uh, SHE was just an educator.
Um, BUT the more recent ones too, I always
like to point to is Dr. David Lay. He's
a psychologist, and, um, Dr. Nicole Prauss, I believe
she's a neuroscientist, and they,
I, I've, I've have her on my show.
Oh, great. Yeah, yeah, both of them have done
great work in this area of pushing back against
misinformation and pushing back against a lot of the
claims of no fat semen retentionists and things like
that, and they have the experience and the publications
to back it up.
Mhm. Great. So the book is again, DIY, The
Wonderfully Weird History and Science of Masturbation. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. Uh, AND Doctor Sprankel, just before we go,
apart from the book, would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Sure, uh, on social media, I'm on Instagram and
Twitter at Doctor Sprankel, and then also just on
my website, uh, Doctor Sprankel.com.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
very fascinating conversation. My pleasure. Thank you. Hi guys,
thank you for watching this interview until the end.
If you liked it, please share it, leave a
like and hit the subscription button. The show is
brought to you by Enlights, Learning and Development done
differently. Check their website at lights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson,
Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex Adam
Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena,
John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru
Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir,
Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognon,
Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel Cerri, Hines,
Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan
Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik
Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski,
Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian
Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin
Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P Scortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith and Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate von Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Danaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janasertner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden,
Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.